✨ feat: Formal verification (#241)
eth-protocol-fellows/protocol-studies: docs/wiki/testing/formal-verification.md

# A brief introduction to formal verification

> ## Mathematics and the art of abstraction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Intro to mathematical abstraction 
```

Or 'abstraction in math 101' or something like that might be a better title here. I know you like to intro with these cute stories but I would rather keep it a bit shorter and formal 😅 Consider making this section leaner with focus on the important pieces

Author: > I know you like to intro with these cute stories

![image](https://github.com/eth-protocol-fellows/protocol-studies/assets/10168946/25e1ad87-ce98-46c5-8f9a-995f335d7778)

This is a fundamental theme in problem solving. Computers do this too. The words on your screen are abstractly [represented in binary on a computer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ASCII) for transmission and storage.

> Mathematics is the language of precision. Abstraction allows us to precisely define the input focused only on relevant features for a given problem. The result of which can be mathematically solved and interpreted as required.

## Formal verification

Formal verification, like the previous example, helps find the answer to a simple question: "Does a system correctly meet its required specifications?"

> Specifically, formal verification is a verification technique that abstracts a system as a mathematical model and proves or disproves its correctness.

A "system" is defined as a mechanism that is able to execute all of the functions given by its external interface. 

"Invariants" are properties that remains unchanged for a system, regardless of its current state. For example, an invariant of a vending machine is: Nobody should be able to dispense a product for free.

Formal verification tests the correctness of a system by checking if all its invariants holds true.

> The philosophical roots of formal methods reach back to ancient Greece with Plato's exploration of theory of forms in his book "Sophist", while mathematicians in the 17th century further developed the concept through abstract algebra. German polymath, Gottfried Leibniz's vision laid the groundwork for what we now call formal reasoning. In the 19th century, pioneering work by George Boole on analysis and Friedrich Frege on propositional logic provided the foundation for formal semantics.

Reviewer: This would be great as a part of the intro section

There are several types of formal methods used to verify a system design:

- **Model checking / assertion-based checking**: Models a system as a finite state machine and verifies its correctness and liveness using propositional logic.
- **Temporal logic**: Models a system whose propositions varies with time.
- **Equivalence checking**: Verifies if two models of the same specification but varying implementations produce the same result.

> Popular tools verification systems are:

Reviewer: Maybe add more context about these tools, what are they used for, etc because it's not ethereum specific

Reviewer: Also one important thing missing here is coq, older and maybe the most adopted tool

- The  [TLA+-based model checker](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/Specifying-Concurrent-Systems-with-TLA.pdf)  by Leslie Lamport
- The  [CSP-based verification](http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=359576.359585) by Tony Hoare
- The  [Alloy language](http://alloytools.org/) from Daniel Jackson at MIT
- The  [Event-B language](http://www.event-b.org/), [Z-notation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Z_notation), and proof tools from Jean-Raymond.

## Example

The first step of formal verification is abstracting the system. Any system can be selectively abstracted for the purpose of testing its correctness.

E.W Dijkstra elegantly describes:

> I have grown to regard a program as an ordered set of pearls, a “necklace”. The top pearl describes the program in its
> most abstract form, in all lower pearls one or more concepts used above are explained (refined) in terms of concepts
> to be explained (refined) in pearls below it, while the bottom pearl eventually explains what still has to be explained
> in terms of a standard interface (=machine). The family becomes a given collection of pearls that can be strung
> into a fitting necklace.

> Let's write a quick TLA+ spec to model that abstracts a traffic controller.

Reviewer: Before diving into the example, provide some context, maybe in the section above that TLA+ is a formal spec language..

```

Note how this abstraction conveniently ignores all the irrelevant interactions at a traffic signal (honking, anyone?).

**Efficient abstraction is an art.**

Understanding the TLA+ semantics are not important for this discussion. Here is a brief of what it does:

`Init` initializes the system with no cars waiting. The `Arrive` models the arrival of cars, increasing the count of waiting cars if the maximum capacity has not been reached. Conversely, the `Depart` simulates cars departing from the controller, decrementing the count of waiting cars if there are any. Lastly ,`ChangeSignal` dictates that if cars are waiting, the traffic signal switches to green.

The invariant `Invariant == carsWaiting <= MaxCars` ensures the number of cars waiting never exceeds `MaxCars`, a defined constant.

## Ethereum and formal verification

Formal verification plays a critical role in verifying safety and liveliness of Ethereum's decentralized infrastructure and its applications. This rigorous method achieves the highest ranking on the [EAL scale](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evaluation_Assurance_Level#EAL7:_Formally_Verified_Design_and_Tested), signifying its profound impact on security.

> 

Reviewer: A little addition to this intro should distinguish various areas how FV can be used in Ethereum before diving into them. e.g. protocol level to verify core specs, onchain to verify contracts users are interacting with..

### Protocol verification

[KEVM](https://github.com/runtimeverification/evm-semantics) builds upon [K framework](https://kframework.org/) for crafting formal semantics and conducting verification of the [Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM)](/wiki/EL/evm.md) specification for correctness.

> Formal verification is an essential tool in the test suite and was used to discover a subtle [array-out-of-bound runtime error](https://consensys.io/blog/formal-verification-of-ethereum-2-0-part-1-fixing-the-array-out-of-bound-runtime-error) within the state transition component.

Reviewer: Runtime verification folks worked on verifying gasper and various parts of the beacon chain. I would list their work here with proper context 
https://github.com/runtimeverification/beacon-chain-verification
https://runtimeverification.com/blog/a-formal-model-in-k-of-the-beacon-chain-ethereum-2-0s-primary-proof-of-stake-blockchain
https://runtimeverification.com/blog/formally-verifying-finality-in-gasper-the-core-of-the-beacon-chain
Also deposit contract, maybe fits the other category https://runtimeverification.com/blog/formal-verification-of-ethereum-2-0-deposit-contract-part-1

![Formal verification as part of testing suite](./img/fv-and-testing.jpg)
> Formal verification a slice of a Swiss cheese model in a test suite – [Source: Codasip](https://codasip.com/2023/09/19/formal-verification-best-practices-to-reach-your-targets/).

### Verifying optimizations

Equivalence checking is extensively used for software optimization. For example, an optimized smart contract can be tested for correctness against its previous version to confirm that the optimization hasn't introduced any unintended behavior.

### Smart contract verification

Bugs or vulnerabilities in smart contracts can have devastating consequences, leading to financial losses and undermining user trust. Formal verification tools like tools [Certora Prover](https://docs.certora.com/en/latest/docs/prover/index.html) and [halmos](https://github.com/a16z/halmos) helps identify these issues.

> Formal verification has always been an integral part of the [Solidity](https://soliditylang.org/) language. Here Christian from the solidity team from an early workshop:

Reviewer: To be more precise, Solidity uses SMTChecker https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/tree/develop/libsolidity/formal

Author: I referenced SMTChecker below the video. I believe it was not used when Chris gave this talk.
https://github.com/eth-protocol-fellows/protocol-studies/blob/ea9446c350306cae8e60422aba807d720ca179bf/docs/wiki/testing/formal-verification.md?plain=1#L136

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/rx0NPckEWGI?si=GYGPPGGA7aY2k4Ci" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

---

Solidity compiler also implements a [formal verification approach based on SMT (Satisfiability Modulo Theories) and Horn solving](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/smtchecker.html).

> Leo from the team explains how to use this feature:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Leo from EF Formal Verification team explains how to use this feature:
```

Reviewer: Another interesting project worked on by FV team was Act https://github.com/ethereum/act
And maybe also worth mentioning https://github.com/lvella/polynomial-solver

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/QQbWpN76HEg?si=CI0cPCVgAkfAM_V2" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

> ## Closing thoughts

Reviewer: I would change this to Challenges or Limits of FV

Formal verification is hard. The process itself can be [complex and time-consuming,](https://www.hillelwayne.com/post/why-dont-people-use-formal-methods) requiring specialized skills and tools. Additionally, formal verification can only guarantee the correctness of the model, not necessarily the underlying implementation itself. Errors in the translation process between code and model can still introduce vulnerabilities.

Formal verification relies on efficient abstraction of a system. And abstraction is hard. If you leave an important detail out of the abstraction it can introduce safety issues. For this reason, often times [engineers use a complementary simulation method like fuzzing](https://blog.trailofbits.com/2024/03/22/why-fuzzing-over-formal-verification/) to test a system using random input.

Despite these challenges, formal verification is a powerful technique that can help define safe and efficient systems. We'll close on this insightful quote from Dijkstra:

> “Program testing can be used to show the presence of bugs, but never to show their absence!”

> ## Resources

Reviewer: I would include some talks on FV from devcon archive or other events like ethcc. I am sure there are bunch from FV team, Solidity, Runtime or others, I attended some workshops with them
